---
layout: page-article

title: "My day one"
sub-title: "My entry into the world of web development was also my first business wound"

where: "Chronicles"
when: "Oct 10 2019"
---
It was a Monday. It was early morning. And it was sunny outside--as usual in Kinshasa. I stood in front of my bedroom mirror, hands on both sides of my forehead, starring deep into my own eyes, repeating the infamous movie quote: "I'm going to make you an offer you can't refuse." I remember taking a deep breath between each sentence, feeling every word with the intensity of a prayer. For me, the stakes were high.

Exactly two months prior, I had decided to dive into web development. Coming from the world of entreprise softwares--moreover, in an environment like Congo--the web appeared to be the soundest road to take in terms of tech career choices. In a place like this, the web will always hold a much bigger share of the market than its native counterparts--which means much more job openings to apply for, much more prospective clients to pitch to and much more users to niche a product for. The idea of starting over wasn't at all thrilling. But I figured it could be easy to nail an impressive project as a starter portfolio. Or so I thought!

My plan was simple but ambitious. In the likes of SAAS products, I would build a website first then find a company to sell it to. My prior coding experiences were entirely native. I had built a Risk Management Software for a starting microfinance incubator (SOFIEC) and also worked on a Point-Of-Sale system for the biggest fast-food chain in the country (former Chez Victoire). But this was web. Without a portfolio of similar works to pitch with, it was best to bring a read-made template clients could see and click around. I chose hostelry as the industry to build for. Hotels are among the most common type of businesses created in Congo. The area also seemed to be the one place this plan could be most effective. I wouldn't need to convince anyone of the business benefits of a web portal, given that the majority already used sites like TripAdvisor. And I wouldn't need to worry about the corporate protocol, because most hotels in the city were small family-owned businesses. My mind was set. This web swerve was happening.

The next step was to learn the world of web products and web services. I knew how to code. But I didn't know <i>what</i> to code. What were the international design standards? What were the browser compatibility guidelines for Subsarahan Africa. More over, how to segment hosting and maintenance plans? And how to price it all? Although, I must point out, the latter mattered the least; my immediate goal was my portfolio, not my bank account.

IT professors enjoy recounting how it was low-level programming that sent the first man to the moon. Every other tech news in the media spoke of robots and held deep-learning on a pedestal. And at the other end of the programming spectrum, laid the web stacks--where, it seemed, every 10th tech joke on the internet was a mockery meme depicting the "html hacker". I remember CSS3 had just been launched and had peaked instantly, but not enough to clear it of its (now former) reputation of weakness. And my country still held onto one of the oldest and least-appreciated title in IT: <i>webmaster</i>. On first look, this end of the spectrum held the least amount of prestige. From where I stood, I could not begin to phantom any semblance of pride in what I was enterprising. But the decision was a pragmatic one. It had to be done nonetheless.

Looking back now, I laugh at how indoctrinated I was with the tales of "elitist" programming languages. The web, it turns out, is a lot more fascinating than I had imagined. See, the internet has community-governed roots. Experimenters are its main shapers. Today's hack is tomorrow's native feature. Owned by none, useful to many, improved by all. Isn't that democracy at its finest? And if CSS3, RWD or NodesJS were the viral jargons at the time, they weren't at all the most impressive. What I learned in that one month of research was enough to revamp my respect for the field. The concept of "web apps" was on the rise and it was, to me, the most important advantage. "The omnipresence of software", as I had termed it. Deploy it once, and access it everywhere--from fancy Macbooks to features phones.

After a month of intense research, I had enough data to start building. I went with a "web 2.0" design style, which denoted Bootstrap-like UIs. It was the rising trend globally and I wanted to impress. I added a booking area and a scrollable 360-degree room-view (disclaimer: it sounds fancy but it's easy to produce with panoramic photos). I had also analyzed the pricing from multiple countries and even the must-have clauses to include in a contract. I was set. It was time to go pitch. I was ready to impress and nail my first web work.

The first target was Le Havre de Paix, in my own neighborhood. The man I met at the reception gave me hope. There was skepticism, but I was prepared. I had rehearsed a plethora of sales rebuttals and went about distilling every single one of his doubts. His biggest worry seemed to be my "solo" status. I told him it was precisely what they needed as I would be available night and day, then I showed him the uptime report of their website (that I had gathered via Ping). Happy to see how much homework I had done, he finally told me he was the manager and requested me to come back in the afternoon. My plan was working. The day appeared promising.

The next hotels, however, quickly shattered my enthusiasm. There was a lot of rudeness in the hours that followed. Until I reached Faden House, in the poshest neighborhood. The routine check before entering any place was to wipe the sand off my feet and slap the exhaustion off my face. Forcing a smile, I pitched for yet another potential: "NO". The young lady eyed me quizzingly. I knew she wasn't the one to make the final decision nor did she have the power to influence it in any way, but I needed to book a meeting at the very least. "Why didn't you send a letter first?" she asked. I was baffled but quickly replied that I wanted to build a bond first, to be sure my letter wouldn't be discarded before it were even open. After all, wasn't I just an anonymous girl with a track record of work completely different from what I was proposing here? That made her laugh. I proceeded to tell her that my site had a booking system in-built, and that it worked on mobile as well. Responsive Design was a new concept at the time. And that sealed the deal. I was to meet the manager right away.

I was thrilled as I turned on my laptop, excited to finally show the work live to someone. Then the door reopened. The lady was followed by a tall, fit man. He paused just a few steps in. I observed with the biggest of smiles. He had light brown skin, and a bald head. He seemed sympathetic. They murmured a bit, he greeted me from afar, then turned around and left. I glanced at myself, wondering what made him run. And it hit me. My entire day made sense that very second. I got it... I didn't look the part. I had on blue jeans and ballerinas, no Rolex watch and, from my tired face, it was obvious I had been walking for hours. I got it! But was this the reason here aswell? That I'll never know. With an apologetic face, the sweet lady told me to send a letter anyway. She would make sure he read it.

Needless to say, I didn't attempt any new place after this. However, I went back to the first hotel. As I was turning on my laptop, describing the site features I failed to mention in the morning, I noticed the manager staring down. Following his gaze, I froze when I noticed what he was looking at. I had forgotten to wipe the sand off my feet. At that very instant, I knew the meeting was over. He noticed my embarrassment through my sheepish look and added: "It's good, like that guy in that movie... The Pursuit of Happiness." It did sound positive. I wrote down my number, hoping the hustle spirit of the movie would get me a call back. It didn't. In fact, very soon after, the hotel's website was redesigned in a fresh "Web 2.0" RWD. Many months passed by before luck had me stumble upon this man in the streets. I simply joked as I walked pass: "In the movie, Will Smith got the job." This time he was the one with the sheepish look.

My first day of solopreneurship was a wonderful failure. I say "wonderful" for the laughter, for the lessons. That is a day I will always remember. But it wasn't a wasted day nonetheless. <i>There is always tomorrow.</i> I was now armed with a little bit more knowledge of my city's business environment. I received a lot of NOs that day. But I did get a YES eventually, many many weeks later. Oh, what a feeling!

Later in life, I would give freelancing a shot. A little more after that, I'd grow it beyond my own person. And every now and then, I like to sit back and giggle, reminiscing that day. I see beauty in inexperience. I see power and confidence that I could never succeed to summon today. I was twenty, I had ten sheets of handkerchief in my pocket, one laptop held tight on my chest, and in my heart, the adamant belief that I was going to make the world an offer, so appealing, not a single person would possibly refuse.